changes to chapter 3. Raw data processing (#327)
theislab/single-cell-best-practices: jupyter-book/introduction/raw_data_processing.md

# Raw data processing

Here, we discuss the fundamental aspects of "preprocessing" for single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (sc/snRNA-seq) data. While "preprocessing" is a common terminology, it can be misleading.
The process involves critical decisions about handling and representing the data that directly impact subsequent analyses.
For clarity, we will refer to this phase of processing as "raw data processing", and our focus will be on the phase of data analysis that begins with lane-demultiplexed FASTQ files and ends with a count matrix.
This matrix represents the estimated number of distinct molecules derived from each gene per quantified cell, sometimes categorized by the inferred splicing status of each molecule ({numref}`raw-proc-fig-overview`).

:::{figure-md} raw-proc-fig-overview
<img src="../_static/images/raw_data_processing/overview_raw_data_processing.jpg" alt="Chapter Overview" class="bg-primary mb-1" width="800px">

An overview of the topics discussed in this chapter. In the plot, "txome" stands for transcriptome.
:::

> The count matrix is the foundation for a wide range of scRNA-seq analyses {cite}`raw:Zappia2021`, including normalization, integration, and filtering through methods for cell type identification, developmental trajectory inference, and expression dynamics studies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The count matrix is the foundation for a wide range of scRNA-seq analyses {cite}`raw:Zappia2021`, including cell type identification or developmental trajectory inference.
```

However, the boxes should not extend into the red area (poor quality calls).

If poor-quality calls are observed, quality trimming may be necessary. [A more detailed explanation](https://hbctraining.github.io/Intro-to-rnaseq-hpc-salmon/lessons/qc_fastqc_assessment.html) of sequencing error profiles can be found in the [HBC training program](https://hbctraining.github.io/main/).

:::{figure-md} raw-proc-fig-fastqc-per-read-sequence-quality
<img src="../_static/images/raw_data_processing/fastqc_example/per_read_sequence_quality.jpg" alt="per read sequence quality" class="bg-primary mb-1" width="800px">

A good (left) and a bad (right) per-read sequence quality graph.
:::

**3. Per tile sequence quality**

Using an Illumina library, the per-tile sequence quality plot highlights deviations from the average quality for reads across each {term}`flowcell` [tile](https://www.biostars.org/p/9461090/)(miniature imaging areas of the {term}`flowcell`).

> The plot uses a color gradient to represent deviations, where “hotter” colors indicate larger deviations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plot uses a color gradient to represent deviations, where warmer colors indicate larger deviations.
```

Reviewer: But this is weird. Can we describe this better than warm and cold colors?

Author: "more intense or shifted colors" could be an alternative, but I don't see "warmer" colors being weird. It's a real way of describing colors in art!

Reviewer: Then let's stick to warmer. But not hotter please haha

High-quality data typically display a uniform blue color across the plot, indicating consistent quality across all tiles of the flowcell.

> If hot colors appear in certain areas, it suggests that only part of the flowcell experienced poor quality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If warm colors appear in certain areas, it suggests that only part of the flowcell experienced poor quality.
```

Finally, spliced alignment requires an available reference genome for the organism under study.
While this is rarely an issue for well-characterized model organisms, it can pose challenges when working with non-model organisms, where only a transcriptome assembly may be available.

(raw-proc:txome-mapping)=

#### Mapping to the spliced transcriptome

To reduce the computational overhead of spliced alignment to a genome, a widely adopted alternative is to use only the annotated transcript sequences as the reference.
Since most single-cell experiments are conducted on model organisms like mouse or human, which have well-annotated transcriptomes, transcriptome-based quantification can achieve similar read coverage to genome-based methods.

Compared to the genome, transcriptome sequences are much smaller, significantly reducing the computational resources needed for mapping.
Additionally, because splicing patterns are already represented in transcript sequences, this approach eliminates the need for complex spliced alignment.
Instead, one can simply search for contiguous alignments or mappings for the read.

> Instead, reads can be mapped using contiguous alignments, making both alignment-based and lightweight-mapping techniques suitable for transcriptome references.

Reviewer: Two sentences that start with `instead` one after another.
```suggestion
Alternatively, reads can be mapped using contiguous alignments, making both alignment-based and lightweight-mapping techniques suitable for transcriptome references.
```

By incorporating these elements, augmented transcriptome references maintain a smaller index than the full genome while still allowing for contiguous read alignments.
This enables faster and more memory-efficient mapping compared to full-genome alignment, while still capturing many reads that would otherwise be missed when mapping solely to the spliced transcriptome.

Additionally, expanding the reference set improves mapping accuracy.
More reads can be confidently assigned compared to using only the spliced transcriptome, and when combined with lightweight mapping approaches, spurious mappings can be significantly reduced {cite}`raw:He2022`.
Augmented transcriptomes are widely used in methods that do not map to the full genome, particularly for single-nucleus data processing and RNA velocity analysis {cite}`Soneson2021Preprocessing` (see {doc}`../trajectories/rna_velocity`).
These augmented references can be constructed for all common methods that do not rely on spliced alignment to the full genome {cite}`Srivastava2019,Melsted2021,raw:He2022`.

> {cite:t}`raw:He2022` argue that this approach is valuable even for standard single-cell RNA-seq data and recommend constructing an augmented _splici_ reference (spliced + intronic) for mapping and quantification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{cite}`raw:He2022` argue that this approach is valuable even for standard single-cell RNA-seq data and recommend constructing an augmented _splici_ reference (spliced + intronic) for mapping and quantification.
```

Why the `:t`?

One commonly-applied criterion for filtering is alignment orientation.
Specifically, certain chemistries specify protocols such that the aligned reads should only derive from (i.e. map back to) the underlying transcripts in a specific orientation.
For example, in 10x Genomics 3' Chromium chemistries, we expect the biological read to align to the underlying transcript's forward strand, though anti-sense reads do exist {cite}`technote_10x_intronic_reads`.
As a result, reads mapped in the reverse-complement orientation to the reference sequences may be ignored or filtered out based on user-defined settings.
If a chemistry follows such a so-called "stranded" protocol, this should be documented.
```

### Type of errors in barcoding

The tag, sequence, and demultiplexing method used for single-cell profiling is generally effective.
However, in droplet-based libraries, the number of observed cell barcodes (CBs) can differ significantly—often by several fold—from the number of originally encapsulated cells.
This discrepancy arises from several key sources of error:

> - Doublets/Multiplets: A single barcode may be associated with multiple cells, leading to an undercounting of cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Doublets/multiplets: A single barcode may be associated with multiple cells, leading to an undercounting of cells.
```

> - Empty Droplets: Some droplets contain no encapsulated cells, and ambient RNA can become tagged with a barcode and sequenced, resulting in overcounting of cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Empty droplets: Some droplets contain no encapsulated cells, and ambient RNA can become tagged with a barcode and sequenced, resulting in overcounting of cells.
```

> - Sequence Errors: Errors introduced during PCR amplification or sequencing can distort barcode counts, contributing to both under- and over-counting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sequence errors: Errors introduced during PCR amplification or sequencing can distort barcode counts, contributing to both under- and over-counting.
```

Additionally, transcript-level representations have been proposed for clustering and dimensionality reduction in full-length single-cell RNA-seq data {cite}`Ntranos2016` and for differential expression analysis in single-cell RNA-seq {cite}`Ntranos2019`.
In this case, instead of the resulting count matrix having dimensions $C \times G$, where $G$ is the number of genes in the quantified annotation, it will have dimension $C \times E$, where $E$ is the number of distinct _gene groups_ (commonly called equivalence class labels) across all cells in the given sample.
By propagating this information to the output count matrix, one can avoid the application of heuristic or probabilistic UMI resolution methods that can result in loss of data, or bias, in the counts used in downstream analyses.
Of course, to make use of this information, downstream analysis methods must expect the information in this format.
Further, those downstream methods must typically have a way to resolve these counts, eventually, to the level of genes, as the abundance of _gene groups_ lacks the intuitive biological interpretability of gene abundance.

> Nonetheless, the benefits provided by such representations, in terms of conveying more complete and accurate information to downstream analysis tools, can be substantial, and tools taking advantage of such representations are being developed (e.g. [DifferentialRegulation](https://github.com/SimoneTiberi/DifferentialRegulation)); this is still an active area of research.

Reviewer: This tool is too unknown and I'd not link to anything here. We Let's just say that this is an active area of research.
